---] 1 - Cybersecurity Definitions

NIST defines cybersecurity or information security as:
> The protection of information systems from unauthorized:
> - access,
> - use,
> - disclosure,
> - disruption,
> - modification, or
> - destruction
>  in order to provide confidentiality, integrity and availability.

These three principles of Confidentiality, Integrity and Availability
are known as the **CIA Triad**.

- Confidentiality: is synonymous with privacy. Confidentiality measures
  prevent data from falling into the hands of people who do not have
  authorization to access said information;
- Integrity: is about making sure information is accurate and
  always remains the same;
- Availability: is about keeping system working and requires routine
  maintenance and upgrading of hardware, software and operating system
  environments;

---] 1.1 - Main Terms

Four key terms are:
- Vulnerability, a flaw, loophole, oversight, or error that can be exploited
  to violate a system security policy;
- Threat, is an event, natural or man-made, able to cause negative impact
  to an organization, like a hurricane, a fire or an hacker;
- Expoit, is a defined way to breach the security of an IT system through
  a vulnerability;
- Risk, it is a situation involving exposure to danger, or the likelihood
  of a vulnerability to be exploited;

---] 1.2 Security Threats


                             Security Threats
                                     |
                                     |
                                     |
             +-----------------------+---------------------+
             |                                             |
             v                                             v
         Human Factors                               Natural Factors
             |                                             |
             +---------------------------+                 v
             |                           |       Hurricane/Floods/Tsunami
             v                           v
     Internal Factors            External Threats 
             |                           |
     +-------+-----------+               v
     |                   |       Malicious Events
     v                   v               |
  Former              Current            v
  Employees           Employees   Hackers/Crackers
                                         |
                                         v
                                 Virus/Trojans/Worms

                         Fig. 1 Security Threats

Please, note that many if not most threats come from the inside (Internal Factors).


---] 1.3 - Vulnerability Assessment

A vulnerability assessment is the process of identifying,
analyzing, and ranking vulnerabilities in a specific environment.


---] 1.4 - Roles in Cybersecurity

Here we report a common list of roles used by companies involved with
cybersecurity. Note that although the list tries to be as general as
possible, many companies adopt custom role names.

- CISO (Chief Information Security Officer),
  this is a fairly new role and was created to make sure
  there is a head and someone in charge of the information
  security division to supervise and be the leader of the
  infosec tower;

- Information Security Architect;

- Information Security Consultant/Specialist;

- Information Security Analyst,
  this is the day-to-day person in charge of conducting basic
  information security assessments and more specifically analyzing
  the events, alerts, alarms and any information that could be
  useful to identify any threats that could compromise the
  organization. So basically it gets events from a SIEM
  and conducts an investigation to understand what it is
  about and how to prevent the alert from popping up, e.g.,
  modifying IPS/IDS configuration;

- Information Security Auditor,
  this person checks if a computer systems is following the best
  practices outlined by standards, such as ISO-27001 or ISO27002;

- Security Software Developer;

- Penetration Tester / Ethical Hacker (part of the red team);

- Vulnerability Assessor;

- Digital Forensic Analyst (part of the blue team);

- SIEM Engineer (part of the blue team),
  the person responsible for the tuning and configuration
  of a SIEM platform;


---] 1.4 - History of Cybersecurity

The main major factors that contributed to the rise
of cybersecurity during history are:
- Reagan
- 9/11
- Pervasive use of technology (everybody with a phone)

Everything started with Ronald Reagan a US president that also was a
Hollywood actor. Reagan asked to his security advisor if what he saw on
"Wargames" could be real.  Reagan powers the NSA and other commands in
the US to deal with the cyberspace.
Ronald Reagan was the first American president who recognized the
need for a national policy on cybersecurity.

Then, the government started to think about how to avoid another 9/11,
Peal Harbor in the US.  But also how to avoid damage to fundamentala
infrastructures.
Note that many of the cybersecurity operations deployed by the US
government like STUXNET or mass-surveillance programs was because of
the 9/11 twin towers attack.

At the end, the pervasive use of technology boosted again the interest
in cybersecurity, being the third major factor that contributed to the
rise of cybersecurity attention in the US, also because not only it means
that anybody can be vulnerable but also that anybody could potentially
start an attack.


---] 1.5 - Early Operation Attempts and Some Victories

- Clipper Chip, chip developed by NSA that should have been used by
  phone companies to encrypt communications,
  but never really used and cancelled in 1996. The main cause was that
  it was proprietary and most likely vulnerable.
- Moonlight Maze, was a 1999 US government investigation into a massive
  data breach of classified information coming from a MainFrame in
  Moscow. Moonlight Maze represents one of the first widely known
  cyber-espionage campaigns in world history. I
- Solar Sunrise, another investigative operation by US after an advanced
  attack to important US departments, the attackers were two teens from
  California and an israeli hacker (known as "the analyzer" or "pink pony"),
  around 2000.
- Buckshoot Yankee, this is the most significant breach by US military
  systems, which was deployed as a series of compromises in 2008.
  The attackers used a trojan known as "Agent.BTZ" which stayed on the systems
  for 14 months. Nobody understood where the attack came from, but an hypothesis
  says from China.
- Desert Storm, this was a real military operation but comprehending a cyber
  component, early '90s.
- Bosnia, this was a real military operation but comprehending a cyber
  component, early '90s.


---] 1.6 - Cybersecurity Today in Numbers

- Every year we have more or less 10k of newly found vulnerabilities;
- Cybercrime costs about 100 bilions of USD only in the US;
- Every year about 400 bilions of USD are spent for cyberattacks around the world;
- In 2019 the data lost cost was about 2.1 bilions of dollars;

To have some yearly numbers about cybersecurity we can use the:
"X-Force Threat Intelligence Index", which is a yearly report.


